NFT games: What are they and how do they work
Introduction
The scramble for NFTs had all digital creators in a frenzy trying to get a piece of the NFT loot.
Artists of all kinds set to work; renowned painters digitized some of their best works as
expensive NFTs, even rapper Snoop Dogg released his NFT collection “A Journey with the
Dogg.”
While the entertainment industry was buzzin with NFTs, the video game industry was similarly
far from slumber. The gaming industry for long had sought a way to bridge the gap between the
virtual and real world, and NFTs are the perfect solution. GameFi, is the chosen term to refer to
blockchain games characterized by financial incentives, simply coined from Video games +
Decentralized Finance (GameFi). This combination has brought dreams to reality as your video
game expertise can now directly earn you a living.
With some game NFTs costing up to $1.1m, like the Mystic Axie, a character on Axie Infinity or
pale purple kitty, a character on Cryptokitties which cost $1.3m, it’s no surprise that gamers are
trooping into the space for the chance of a big cash out, and sources claim this is just the
beginning.
What exactly is an NFT Game?
An NFT game is simply any video game that is centered around the acquisition of digital assets
to be exchanged or traded for profit. These games apply the mechanism of blockchain in their
core function as secure ownership and exchange of digital assets is only possible with the use of
smart contracts. Sometimes these games function with multiple smart contracts, like
Cryptokitties, a pioneer NFT game which contributed to popularizing Ethereum’s ERC721
standard. This game makes use of 4 main smart contracts, all serving different functions to
ensure rarity and security of its assets.
The difference between NFT games and Traditional games?
You just earned a sword that kills enemies with one blow. Can you make money off this sword
by trading it in a marketplace? If no, then you’re playing a traditional game. This is the major
difference between traditional and NFT games—real world financial incentives.
Additionally, NFT games have a decentralized nature, they make use of the blockchain
technology to put control of the game’s future in the hands of the players. Players decide key
changes and updates to the game using governance tokens. The more tokens you have, the higher
your voting power. Lastly, blockchain games are fairly complex as they require some knowledge
of crypto and blockchain before diving in. Games running on the Ethereum blockchain would
require players to buy some ETH for use in-game, likewise games built on the Binance Smart
Chain or Solana blockchain would require players having some BNB or SOL.
How can you earn from NFT games?
If you’re an avid gamer looking for a way to boost your crypto portfolio then NFT games could
be a viable option for you. Play-to-earn crypto games reward gamers with in-game currency or
tokens for dedicating long hours to gaming. Tokens can be earned in various ways, completing
game quests, winning battles, crafting items for sale, etc. These earned tokens can then be
exchanged for major tokens like Bitcoin, BNB or other tokens.
Best NFT game marketplaces
NFT marketplaces are decentralized applications built for the purpose of buying and selling
digital assets. Deciding a suitable marketplace will involve a few considerations like what
blockchain and cryptocurrency will be used, fees, and what type of assets are sold.
Opensea – The most popular NFT marketplace of all as it allows for a wide range of
digital assets to be sold on its platform. Opensea is also a host to popular NFT games like
CryptoKitties, and Cryptopunks.
Pros – Free listing, user friendly platform great for newbies, and offers a wide range
of digital assets. Supports Ethereum (ETH/WETH), SOL, USDC, and DAI.
Axie Marketplace – As you must have guessed, this is a marketplace dedicated to the
video game, Axie Infinity. On this marketplace users can purchase all assets from the
video game such as Axies, virtual lands and other craft items.
Pros – A one-stop shop for all things Axie. Supports Axie Infinity tokens, Axie
Shards.
Rarible – An upcoming NFT marketplace built on the Ethereum blockchain. Rarible just
like Opensea is host to a wide range of digital assets. Its user-friendly platform allows
newbies to create and mint NFTs without any special skills. Rarible is home to a few
games like MyCryptoHeroes, Wizards & Dragons, and CryptoMans.
Pros – Easy to use interface, a wide variety of digital assets. Supports Rarible
governance token, RARI.
Popular NFT games
Axie Infinity – One of the first on scene, launched in 2018, Axie infinity is an NFT game
by Mavis studio. Its concept is simple; catch the mythical creatures (Axies) and train
them to fight other player’s Axies. The game has a story mode and versus mode, both can
earn you its native token Axie Shards.
Decentraland – The NFT real estate game launched in 2015. Decentraland is a virtual
reality (VR) game running on the Ethereum blockchain. The idea is based on exploring
and buying all kinds of properties. Players can own anything from playgrounds to movie
cinemas. Allowing other users explore and possibly purchase their establishments. Its
native token MANA doubles as a governance token, aiding users vote on its future.
Gods Unchained – An NFT card game involving immense strategies. Launched in 2021,
God’s unchained is a card game similar to the Elder Scrolls world. Built on the Ethereum
blockchain its main asset, playing cards are non-fungible tokens. Which can be traded
and exchanged for major cryptos like BNB. The platform recently announced it will be
issuing a governance token, $GODS token.
Conclusion
Although NFT gaming is relatively new, the GameFi space seems to be rapidly gaining traction.
This could be based on its addictive nature—play video games and earn at the same time? That’s
every millennial’s dream. The psychology of its addictive nature is rooted in its gameplay.
Players who jump on board the game with freebies get destroyed by paying players, forcing them
to either pay for an upgrade or abandon the game entirely. But at least with NFT games when
you get tired of them it doesn’t translate to wasted efforts; users have the option of selling their
items at the end of play.
